Inaba SDBM Manipulator
=======================

## Introduction

Inaba SDBM Manipulator is a command line tool to manipulate SDBM database.

## Operation Environment

We checked good operation within following environment.

- Linux（openSUSE 12.2）・Mac OS X 10.8.2
- Ruby 1.9.3
  
## Architectonics

- **bin**
  - **inaba** :: Executable script
- **doc** :: Documents generated by rdoc
- **lib**
  - **inaba**
    - **manipulator.rb** :: Manipulator class
- **Rakefile** :: Rakefile that is used to generate gem file
- **test**
  - **tb_manipulator.rb** :: Unit test of Manipulator
  
## Depended libraries

- [Hakto SDBM Safe Wrapper](http://blog.quellencode.org/post/37391766923/ruby-hakto-safe-sdbm-wrapper)
- [Ariete STDOUT & STDERR Capture Module](http://blog.quellencode.org/post/37625422082/ariete-stdout-stderr-capture-module)

## Install

Download inaba-x.y.z.gem, then execute following command to install Inaba.

`$ sudo gem install inaba-x.y.z.gem`

On the other hand, you can install from RubyGems.org to use following command.

`$ sudo gem install inaba`

## Tutorial

### Configuration of environment variable

Set file path of SDBM database to environment variable named $INABA_DB. If target database file is named rabbit.sdb, use following command in bash.

`$ export INABA_DB="rabbit.sdb"`

### Add key value pair

Use **add** command to add a value to key.

`$ inaba add rabbit RABBIT`

Use **list** command to show key value pairs.

`$ inaba list`

    [rabbit]:RABBIT
    
Add more pairs.

`$ inaba add bunny BUNNY`

`$ inaba add hare HARE`

`$ inaba list`

    [rabbit]:RABBIT
    [bunny]:BUNNY
    [hare]:HARE
    
Inaba can output a pair list with CSV format.

`$ inaba csv`

    rabbit,RABBIT
    bunny,BUNNY
    hare,HARE
    
Also use **keys** command to list keys.

`$ inaba keys`

    rabbit, bunny, hare,
    
**Values** command works listing values.

`$ inaba values`

    RABBIT, BUNNY, HARE,

Use **del** command to delete key value command.

`$ inaba del rabbit`

`$ inaba list`

    [bunny]:BUNNY
    [hare]:HARE
    
**Clear** command removes all key value pairs.

`$ inaba clear`     

## Commands reference

|コマンド  |引数         |説明                                |
|----------|-------------|------------------------------------|
|**add**   |*key* *value*|Add *value* to *key*                |
|**del**   |*key*        |Delete a value associated with *key*|
|**list**  |             |Output key value pairs              |
|**keys**  |             |Output keys                         |
|**values**|             |Output values                       |
|**csv**   |             |Output pairs with CSV format        |
|**help**  |             |Output command list                 |

## License

Inaba is distributed with MIT License. See the LICENSE file to read the detail of license.

## About Author

Moza USANE  
[http://blog.quellencode.org/](http://blog.quellencode.org/ "")  
mozamimy@quellencode.org